From:	Robert C Merton <rmerton@MIT.EDU>
Sent:	Saturday, May 11, 2013 6:53 PM
To:	Keith A. Lewis
Subject:	RE: Clifford A. Truesdell III
Attachments:	Theory of Finance from the Perspective of Continuous Time 1975.pdf; 
Mathematics of Specultative Price.pdf; Capital Ideas Chapter 11. RCM  
2005.pdf; Dynamic General Equilibrium Model 12 70.pdf; Contingent Claims 
Pricing and MM 1977.pdf

Dear Professor Lewis,

I have responded below to your questions as well attached a few articles that you may find of some 
use.  One of them is an appendix that I wrote to Paul Samuelson’s 12th Annual Von Neumann Lecture 
given in 1971 and published the following year, in which I derive the Black-Scholes equation from 
replication and contrast it with the Samuelson theory.  This is the earliest mention of the name Black-
Scholes option model in print. I was also the one who named it the Black-Scholes model.  You will see a 
1970 working paper which was never published but was widely circulated [published as chapter 11 in my 
book Continuous-Time Finance(CTF)] that develops the CCA pricing of liabilities in a discrete time model 
along the lines of my 1969 joint warrant pricing paper with Paul Samuelson, and also develops what 
later was published as the Intertemporal Capital Asset Pricing Model (ICAPM), and derives the Black-
Scholes model and a general equation for derivative security pricing with stochastic interest rates, in 
two ways: 1. I derive it from dynamic replication [aka a hedge portfolio strategy ] in continuous time 
that eliminates ALL the volatility between the option price and the dynamic mix of the stock and 
bond.  To do this, one has continuous trading and the mathematical tool I used was Ito’s Lemma [the Ito 
Calculus].  I had introduced Ito’s lemma into economics in my work on continuous time optimal 
consumption and portfolio selection which was published in REStat in 1969 and in Journal of Economic 
Theory in 1971 [both appear as chapters in my PhD thesis 1970 and reproduced in CTF].  Ito’s lemma 
provided the means for modeling individual sample paths [and not just their expectations] for portfolio 
returns.  It made it possible for me to show that in fact by following the Black-Scholes dynamic portfolio 
rules, one could eliminate all the risk from hedging the option and Not just the “systematic” or “beta” 
risk of the hedge portfolio...in order to eliminate the all the volatility from the hedge portfolio, it must 
be that the dynamic strategy in the stock and riskfree asset must replicate the payoff to the option along 
every sample path....hence the demonstration of replication; in the working paper, I also derived the 
Black Scholes model from an equilibrium pricing model, namely what became known as the ICAPM.  The 
original Black and Scholes derivation was based on an equilibrium analysis using the Capital Asset Pricing 
Model (CAPM) which was derived as a very short interval but discrete time trading model...their hedge 
position in the stock made the hedge portfolio has a beta = 0 and hence its equilibrium expected return 
had to be the riskfree rate. Since the No-arbitrage requirement ( imposed by replication) is a necessary 
condition for every equilibrium model, the B-S price derived from an equilibrium model had to be the 
same as the one derived from No Replication.  This observation also gives an immediate proof [from 
economics not mathematics] of what has come to known as Risk-Neutral Pricing.  Derivative pricing 
based on replication portfolio [including Black Scholes option prices] will be prices as if the required 
expected return on the derivative and on the underlying are the same and equal to the risk-free 
rate.  The economic argument to prove this goes as follows:  A valid [if empirically false] equilibrium 
model is one in which all agents who trade have linear utility functions in wealth and thus choose their 
portfolios so as to maximize its expected return [without regard for the risk of the portfolio].  The only 
pricing possible for equilibrium is that ALL assets are priced to have the same expected return = riskfree 
interest rate.  Hence the pricing of all derivatives is to discount the expected future value of the 
derivative at the riskfree rate.  But the replication pricing approach gives  the no-arbitrage pricing and 
no arbitrage is a necessary condition to be satisfied by all equilibrium pricing models, and in particular to 
the equilibrium with risk-neutral agents. QED [no need for the Girsanov theorem or any other 
mathematical argument].


In summary Black and Scholes fundamental contribution was to introduce the idea of a dynamic trading 
strategy to hedge the [systematic] risk of the option and my fundamental contribution was to show that 
with continuous trading, the dynamic strategy eliminates all the risk and thus becomes a no arbitrage 
condition [ I also introduced some generalizations such as stochastic bond price and dividends and an 
American exercise feature].  Neither Black nor Scholes had ever heard of Ito’s Lemma or the Ito calculus 
before I showed them my result.  In their published paper version, they provided both versions of the 
derivation...the one from the CAPM [their original way] and the one from dynamic trading in continuous 
time [which came from me]. They put a footnote in their paper acknowledging as much. To the end of 
his life, Black always preferred the CAPM derivation because he didn’t believe in continuous trading [of 
course today with high frequency trading the latency is down to 1 millisecond...pretty close to 
continuous] but most people believe that the replication no arbitrage derivation is more robust. The 
Black Scholes formula is a special case of the methodology we developed.  The Nobel Prize was awarded 
for a new methodology for pricing derivatives [essentially dynamic trading to hedge and replicate 
the  derivative payoffs] and not for  the special case formula with the assumption of lognormality, 
constant volatility and constant interest rate.

http://www.afajof.org/details/videoListing/2866801/Masters-of-Finance-Videos.html

I hope that you find these of some help in your writing.

Best wishes,
RC Merton
From: Keith A. Lewis [mailto:kal@kalx.net]  
Sent: Saturday, May 11, 2013 4:50 PM 
To: rmerton@hbs.edu 
Subject: Clifford A. Truesdell III

Dear Professor Merton,

I am writing a paper on the fundamental theorem of asset pricing and was hoping you would be willing 
to answer a historical question.

When you wrote your paper “Theory of Rational Option Pricing” were you aware of the work of Clifford 
Truesdell?  NO....the title to my paper was motivated by the title of Paul Samuelson’s 1965 “Rational 
Theory of Warrant Pricing” and not “Rational Thermodynamics”

If you feel indulgent, here are a few other questions I am curious about.

The paper seems to have been written in 1971, but published in 1973. Were you delaying publication 
until after Black and Scholes? That is correct.  I arranged with the Editor of Bell Journal to hold up 
publication of my paper until the publication of the Black and Scholes paper. When the JPE finally agreed 
to publish it, I released mine. Thus it was not a coincidence that the two papers appeared in print at the 
same time.  I did this for the obvious reason that it would not be appropriate for my paper to appear 
substantially before their’s.



 
This paper assumes the bond has a stochastic component, and this is essential in your proof. That is not 
at all essential to the proof at all. Stochastic bond prices includes as a special case a non stochastic bond 
price [which Black and Scholes assumed]...it was thus a generalization, not a necessity



Was your 1974 paper “On the Pricing of Corporate Debt…”  the first published version that did not 
require this?  As noted this was not important


 
Are you aware of who was the first to publish a proof that the necessary conditions that the hedging 
portfolio is self-financing are also sufficient? An essential feature of any of these models is that at no 
point can their value be negative [since a negative value for a security or portfolio is not well-defined 
...allowing negative values in a strategy is very much allowing division by zero...one can prove almost 
anything ...including that there is a strategy which can create $2 from $1 with probability one which is 
nonsense.  In my 1969 and 1971 portfolio and consumption papers, I introduced the notion of a price 
per share for each asset which tracked the total return on the portfolio and the number of shares whose 
changes kept track of new money invested into the portfolio or money taken out of the portfolio.  I did 
not coin the term of self-financing portfolio but the condition for pricing must track and take account of 
the payouts and any inflows into the portfolio.  And my derivation took account of that for the 
derivation of the contingent claims [again see the 1970 working paper for instance].  On the other hand 
some mathematicians who tried to show that the derivation was wrong thought that they had done so 
by showing that the strategy would produce arbitrage profits...however their so called counter examples 
allowed negative wealth which is of course makes no economic sense [because the value of the 
instrument depends on who owns it since the owner may not have the resources to pay off the negative 
wealth in which case the boundary condition is incorrect].

There were several similar questions/challenges to the Black Scholes after it was published and so in 
1977 I published a paper [attached] which tried to make clearer that we did not even need the 
derivative to exist to employ the dynamic strategy and one does not need an arbitrage portfolio, one 
can simply treat the replicating strategy as a dynamic production function for manufacturing the 
derivative even if it didn’t previously exist.


A preprint of my paper is available at http://kalx.net/ftapd.pdf. When I started teaching Derivative 
Securities at NYU I was shocked to find no proof of the FTAP accessible at the masters level was 
available. This is my attempt to remedy that.

Thank you,
Keith A. Lewis


